One characteristic that makes immigration to the United States so unique is the general tendency of immigrants to want to fully assimilate into American society. Upon arrival, many immigrants begin to unconsciously accept the “American way of doing things” as the standard way of life and begin to adapt their own cultures and identities in order to closer fit into what they believe is a superior personal identity. Consequently, they will begin to ignore and reject their own backgrounds and cultures in search for greater social acceptance from their peers. While this reaction might seem favorable, eventually immigrants and nonimmigrants alike will begin to see white race and culture as superior to foreign cultures, causing society to reject them much like a body would reject foreign pathogens. In response to these ideals, Gloria Anzaldúa and Frantz Fanon developed racial theories as to how to transform our racial perspective from a binary “Superior-inferior” complexion to a wider spectrum that encompases different races and mixed identities and cultures. Both of these theories, along with historical contexts, are present in the character development of Dagoberto Gilb’s “The Flowers.” “The Flowers" is a coming of age novel that encompases the development of an Anzaldúan and Fanonist multicultural and multi-racial personal identity and how it interacts with other races and racial theories.
“The Flowers” centers around Sonny Bravo, a Mexican-American teenager and his quest to explore and interact with his multicultural identity. Sonny comes from a family who immigrated from Mexico to the United States and, through generations, has become more “Americanized.” Sonny is aware of this transformation and feels disillusioned that he is losing his Mexican culture, initially exemplified by how his family is speaking less Spanish: “I used to feel better about talking Spanish. My mom used to speak it a lot more, and I used to hang out with my grandma, who didn’t speak English,  but all of that stopped once Grandma died  And then my mom only talked Spanish when she had to  So I never spoke it either, never really tried. But I still could understand it, mostly, so I was listening” (Gilb 587). In short, Sonny is experiencing what Gloria Anzaldúa calls “The Mestiza Consciousness” or one’s realization and acceptance that his or her own identity is composed of multiple cultural and racial backgrounds. As Anzaldúa explained in “La conciencia de la Mestiza / Towards a New Consciousness”: “[The] first step is to take inventory  Just what does [one] inherit from [their] ancestors? This weight on [one’s] back - which is the baggage from the Indian mother, which the baggage from the Spanish father, which the baggage from the Anglo?” (Anzaldúa 104). In Sonny’s case, he is struggling with balancing his Mexican culture – which he inherited–  and his American culture – which was partially acquired by his own will and partially imposed on him by his environment. Anzaldúa continues: “Pero es dificil [but it’s difficult] differentiating between lo heredado, lo adquirido, lo impuesto [what was inherited, what was acquired, what was imposed]. This step is a conscious rupture with all oppressive traditions of all cultures and religions” (104). Anzaldúa deems this realization critical to creating coexistence between races, particularly those of Latino and Anglo-Saxon backgrounds, since it “ruptures” the oppressive traditions of Anglo cultures. Anzaldúa argues that since all of a person’s backgrounds are accepted as equal part of one’s own identity, no single one is deemed superior and consequently “chosen” over the rest. Sonny’s instinct to follow his Mestiza Consciousness and search for his identity, coupled with his passive-aggressive personality, acts as a catalyst for many of his actions and interactions throughout the novel.
Sonny manifests this search for personal identities through his multiple interactions with his neighbors and their consequent descriptions. A notable example of Sonny’s search for his identity and his passive-aggressive personality is his tendency to break into houses early in the novel: “Maybe I don’t know exactly what I was doing except I was doing it  I was more [interested in] watching how people lived, imagining how it would be in their house  How would I be if I lived here? I’d let that come into me, I’d let my mind go to the show it liked” (Gilb 93). Throughout the novel Sonny describes a character’s house – more particularly their furniture (i.e. chairs and sofas) – as a symbols of their personalities. Gilb uses these scenes not only to give the reader a deeper sense of a character’s personality, but also to show us how Sonny perceives them. One of the first instances we encounter is when Sonny enters Cloyd’s apartment for the first time and describes “the heavy wooden chairs” made of maple, the multiple heads of game, and multiple certifications and shotguns hanging from the walls. In Cloyd’s example, we how Sonny perceives his ‘heavy’ and superficial attitude by emphasizing his furniture. Another example is how Sonny describes Cindy’s furniture: “The couch was this old one, both too saggy and too hard at the same time  her stuff was really gacho, really raggy and stained. I sat on the front edge of the couch and sipped” (Gilb 673). Again, Sonny’s description of Cindy’s furniture gives the reader a look into his subconscious process.
Another form of evidence of Sonny’s constant perspective seach is his narration style. As Sarah Fay proposed in her review of the book: Sonny’s “voice could easily lapse into self-consciousness  Instead, it replicates [his] worldview, in which languages blend, reality splinters and the senses blur” (Kay 3). The worldview that Kay refers to in her review is Anzaldua’s “Mestiza Consciousness” and how Sonny manifests it by making active language transitions between English, Spanish, and even French. This interweaving of languages is the epitome of Sonny’s multicultural approach to his personal identity and his interactions with other characters. Gilb uses Joe and Mike serve as a way to reinforce Sonny’s open perspective as they seem to be the most receptive and understanding of their own bicultural identities and that of Sonny. Many of the Spanish and French words and phrases in the novel come during conversations between the three; furthermore, it is Joe that explains the ironic nature of the novel’s title: “So Los Flores means the Flores family. Pero, Las Flores means ‘The Flowers.’ What your daddy the Cloyd has up there just means the vato’s a dumbass  You’d think he might have at least looked it up in a dictionary” (Gilb 1088). Furthermore, not only does Gilb use language to reinforce Sonny’s open perspective, but he also uses the lack of it to reinforce other character’s lack of perspective as is the case with Cloyd and “Los Flores.”
Sonny’s multicultural identity manifests throughout the novel as a driving force for cooperation and inclusion between races and ethnicities. Undoubtedly the most prominent example of racial inclusion is the scene in which two black men enter Alley Cats, a usually Mexican-only bowling alley. The alley’s owners Mr. and Mrs. Zuniga become increasingly anxious with the black men, forcing Sonny then becomes an emissary between the two races: “‘I woulda believed this join served Mexican food,’ the black guy closer to me said  ‘It does,’ I said. ‘Oh yeah? So what do you recommend?’ ‘Hamburgers or cheeseburgers.’ They both laughed easy and loud  ‘What the hell kinda Mexican food you used to?’ ‘It’s Mexican now,’ I said. ‘It’s that all you do is let her make it with jalapeños, and she puts her salsa de chile on it too, and then it’s Mexican – as Mexican as it is American’” (Gilb 2142). The burger, as comical as it is, serves as another symbol for Sonny’s multicultural  identity: “As Mexican as it is American.”  Furthermore, Sonny uses this burger as a bridge between his Mexican culture, also represented by Mrs. Zuniga, and the greater American culture, represented by the two black men. This communication between races is critical to both Anzaldúa as a way for racial coexistence and serves as an example of the importance of Mestiza Consciousness and the wider perspective that comes with it. This scene also complements Frantz Fanon’s idea of racial bipolarity. Fanon argues that our society has grown accustomed to the idea that the white race is superior and whatever race is not ‘pure’ white is therefore inferior. Racial bipolarity is especially evident in the United States where, according to Bergsen and Herman, the “conceptual model of US race relations – built on a black/white fulcrum –  is incapable of handling the multicultural vectors of ethnic tension that we have shown to be associated with racial/ethnic violence” (51). In order to combat this idea, Fanon proposes that the public reject whatever injustice, stigma, or inequality existed in the past or currently exists in the present and instead focus on the future. Sonny does exactly this with the two black men in Alley Cats, he rejects the stigma proposed by Mr. and Mrs. Zuniga and instead focuses on the future of the interaction, resulting in a positive outcome.
The scene in Alley Cats is important to the greater historical context of the novel. Gilb used Sonny’s and the two black men’s interaction as a parallel to the role of Latinos during the 1992 Los Angeles riots. Gloria Alvarez, a hispanic journalist, theorizes that Latinos joined African-Americans during the riots not out of outrage of the Rodney King verdict, rather as an attempt to unite cultural and ethnic divisions between blacks and Latinos: “Many of the Latinos who were taking things from local businesses did not even know about the Rodney King case or the acquittal of the police officers, their participation was more about opportunity than a demonstration of outrage  while the reasons for rioting might have been different for African Americans and Latinos in 1992, today there is a greater sense of understanding between the two groups, Dr. Hayes-Bautista said.” (Alvarez 2). Just as was the case in the 1992 Riots, through Sonny’s open perspective African Americans and Latinos grew closer together.
Sonny also encompases Fanon’s idea that an oppressed people should use violence to further their own cause. The use of violence as a form of rebellion is symbolized by Sonny’s rock and his relationship with ‘the sickie.’ When Sonny confronts the sickie towards the end of the novel, he faces a choice between using language or violence to resist him. The sickie offers him to leave him alone if only Sonny would say it, but Sonny cannot bring himself to it: “I hesitated. Because I didn’t know the answer. I wanted the fuck to go, but I didn't want him to go. It wasn't good that I didn't. I was kind of scaring myself.I knew this was it, this is what I expected all along. What I wanted even. You know?” (Gilb 3327). Although it is because of Sonny’s apparent love for his rock – i.e. violence – that he refuses to allow the confrontation to end simply with words. Regardless, like Fanon advocates, Sonny chooses violence to end his confrontation with the sickie effectively killing him.
Anzaldúa’s “Mestiza Consciousness” and Fanon’s racial theories are central to Sonny’s character development in Dagoberto Gilb’s “The Flowers.” Gilb uses these theories in order to study how embracing a multicultural identity adds perspective and empathy to one’s approach to race. Furthermore, Gilb demonstrates how said multicultural identity can become a catalyst for cooperation and inclusion between races. Gaining a deeper understanding of race theory and how it applies in our society is becoming increasingly important as our nation begins to tackle issues with racism and interracial violence. Perhaps one of the first steps we as a society should take in order to combat racism is to invite people to accept their own backgrounds as integral parts of their identities. This way, as Anzaldúa explains, no single race or ethnicity will be deemed superior at the expense of the rest.